---
permalink: /books/
title: "Books"
toc: true
---

I read various kinds of books. It has taught me a lot and has been guiding me. One of the things I observed was, after reading the book I forget most of its content or main idea within few days. Also if the book was big and I took long time to finish it, by the time I reached the end of the book, I would have forgotten what I read in the beginning of the book. So it would be a good thought exercise for me to recap the book's content and write down the gist of it. So this page will hold the small gist or learnings I took away from reading that book.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

All the books I read are bookmarked in [GoodReads](https://www.goodreads.com/harsha_kadekar)

### Release It! Design and Deploy Production-Ready Software
- Author: **Michael T. Nygard**
- GoodReads: [Release It!](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1069827.Release_It_)

As the name of the book implies, the main topic of this book is about how you will design your applications and services such that it can be deployed and maintained in a production environment. There are multiple factors which help for a good design 
* The stress, impulses or component failures will affect the integeration points of the application. And these integeration points will fail and this failure will spread to other parts of the application.
* Whenever you are connecting to remote applications or databases via sockets or RMI or any means we need to protect these connections with timeouts. These remote calls are unpredictable - it can fail with an error, it can take a lot of time to return or it can fail silently. So better to protect them with timeouts.
* Use circuit breakers to protect from the impulses, stress. Make sure there is way to know whether circuit breaker is activated - some kind of metric or alarm is needed.
* In web applications use sessions judiciously. Each session resides in the memory and it will reside for long time even if it is not used.
* If you are expecting high demand for certain resources or functionality then protect it such that those demands are diverted to a separate resource thus protecting the other functionality and components from getting affected due to resource crunch.
* Always use connection pool to connect to a resource whether it is multiple instances of services or database.
* Use ORM to connect and operate to the database. Never directly run a direct SQL query from your application.
* Before releasing to production do a load testing. And remember your development envrionment and QA environment will never be able to match scale of production. Rather than trying to match the scale of production, design your application code such that even in the hightened requests or stress, application should be able to transact.
* Slow responses from your application will lead to other problems like more traffic and customers will keep retrying and more resources are utilized leading to cascading failures. 
* Fail fast is better than slow responses.
* For slow responses, reason could be memory leaks or resource contentions like DB pool is filled up or thread pool is filled up.
* Do not blindly put an SLA to your services. Measure it. Understand the SLA of your dependent services. Based on that derive your SLA. You cannot give an SLA which is better than your dependent service.
* Use bulkheads in case of failures, so that even if some components fail your product is still running and insulated from the failed components.
* Caching has limits. It increases your services response to certain extent after that it will eat your memory and thus leading to decrease in response. So use it carefully.
* Make sure you clean up your old logs. Either move to a different location but do not allow it fill up space.
* Clean up your old data. Maintain data hygiene. 
* All these disk cleanup and application data clean up has to happen automatically via your application rather than human intervention.
* When you test, do not just go by your requirements. Go out of requirements when testing negative failure scenario. 
* Try to use intelligent load balancers that consistently does health checks of the underlying systems and based on bad health stops sending requests to those instances.
* Try to provide an adminstrative CLI tool for every service for ops work.
* Set up alarms and monitors like for system health, requests recieved, response time, max threads, max connections. There should be dashboard to monitor these metrics and alarms to give real time picture of what is happenning to your service or application. Logs are a great way to learn about what is happening but metrics & alarms give you high level picture of what is going on. Also have tools which will read your logs and alarms based on specific stack trace occurrence such as exceptions or faults being reported in logs.
* Releases should be done often and all the release activity should be automated - aim for continuous deployment.


### ಶಿಕಾರಿ Shikari
- Author: **Yashwant Chittal**
- GoodReads: [ಶಿಕಾರಿ Shikari](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25657010-shikari)

The book is about corporate politics. The main protagonist is hunted (ಶಿಕಾರಿ Shikari) from multiple directions. The narration of the story is also very different, as in everything is happening through the view point of the hero. It's as if I am part of the mind of the hero and listening to every thought that is getting generated in his mind. It gives clear picture of how the game of corporate politics and it's fight are fought, how each human relation is utilized for acheiving something in the corporate world, how a person becomes a pawn between the fights of heads. The thing which stood out is how it gives a clear picture of human greed and selfish nature. The moment when a person is in the path of losing, everyone will swoop in like vultures to take their revenge and also the moment humans come to know that you are a losing side, they will shift their allegiance. You and you alone are your friend. Its a good read.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}


### The Little Book Of Common Sense Investing
- Author: **John C Bogle**
- GoodReads: [The Little Book Of Common Sense Investing](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/34003072-the-little-book-of-common-sense-investing)

Jobh C Bogle is founder and ex-chairman of Vangaurd. In this book he makes a very strong case for investing in low cost index funds. He gives lot of reasons why we should not try to trump the market returns. Following are the learnings I take from this book:
1. Do not do short term investing. Always aim for long term investing.
2. Investment should be diversified. A person will secure his returns if he owns all of the business available in the market.
3. Do not try to choose individual stocks and invest in it. It is a loosing game. Now index funds will provide the necessary diversification.
4. When you are investing, invest in low cost index funds which will provide the diversification and also has low cost, interms of tax and managing. Do not invest in high cost mutual/equity funds which would eat up all the returns in the cost of maintaining it. So only fund managers will earn money in it.
5. ETF are good option as long as it is targetted towards diversified portfolio like S&P 500 or US Total Stock market. These ETF should be again long term investments and not short term investments.
6. Remember your returns include the dividends which you get from investing in the fund. Those dividends should also be ideally reinvested. 
7. Initially when you start investing you should have ideally 80/20 Index Fund/Bond investment. As you progress towards your retirements, this share needs to be changed. Usually the ratio will reverse. 
8. From time to time you need to evaluate your investments and maintain that investment ratio. This investment can be still diversified like 40% in US Index Funds, 20% in Non US Market Funds and 20% in Bonds.
9. Remember do not invest emotionally. The market has a mean reversion - Every time market goes up it will come back down to its normal trajectory, similarly everytime market goes down it will come back up to its normal trajectory.


### Light on the Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali
- Author: **Patañjali (Commentator & Translator: B K S Iyengar)**
- GoodReads: [Light on the Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/139352.Light_on_the_Yoga_S_tras_of_Pata_jali)

B.K.S. Iyengar is famous for his Yoga practices. In this book, he has not only provided literal English translation of each of the sūtras, but also gives detailed explanation and commentary on it. The book gives systematic steps a person needs to take to achieve the Kaivalya ( individual self merges to universal self). There are different stages which the saadhaka needs to pass through by continuous saadhana. Every person based on his previous Saadhana and their nature, we can classify their level to 4 sections. In Yoga Sūtras, Patañjali has given four sections (Pāda) - Samadhi Pada, Saadhana Pada, Vibhuti Pada and Kaivalya Pada which can be adopted based on the maturity of practitioner. B.K.S. Iyengar explains the similarities between Bhagavad Geeta and Yoga Sutras. 
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

B.K.S. Iyengar gives one of the best explanation for the Abhyasa and Vairagya - "Abhyasa is a dedicated, unswerving, constant, and vigilant search into a chosen subject, pursued against all odds in the face of repeated failures for indefinitely long period of time. Vairagya is the cultivation of freedom from passion, abstention from worldly desires and appetites, and discrimination between real and the unreal. It is the act of giving up all sensuous delights. Abhyasa builds confidence and refinement in the process of culturing the consciousness, whereas vairagya is the elimination of whatever hinders progress and refinement. Proficiency in vairagya develops the ability to free oneself from the fruits of action." 
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

BKS also explains the importance of self discipline for a Saadhaka. Yoga is for reaching perfection in a human by means of using himself as the tool. "The disciplines of purifying man's three constituents, body, speech and mind constitute kriyayoga, the path to perfection. Our bodies are purified by self-discipline (tapas), our works by Self-study (svadhyaya) and our minds by love and surrender to Him (Isvara pranidhana)". One of the main misconception previaling is equating Yoga to asana. Asana is just small part of yoga,whereas Yoga is a whole system consisting of many things which needs to be practiced and cultivated to achieve the ultimate goal of Kaivalya. Yoga practioner gains following knowledge -  knowledge of the body, knowledge of energy, knoweldge of controlling the mind, stability in intelligence, knowledge gained by experience, absorption of the various flavours that life offers and knowledge of the self. By yogic practices the sadhaka conqures his body, controls his energy, restrains the movements of the mind and develops sound judgement, from which he acts rightly and becomes luminous. From this luminosity he develops total awareness of the very core of his being, achieves supreme knowledge, and surrenders his self to the Supreme Soul. 
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

As part of Yoga, we need to practice following things - Yama ( satya, ahimsa, non stealing, brahmacharya, freedom from avarice or non covetousness), Niyama (sauca - cleanliness, santosha - contentment, tapas - religious fervour, svadhyaya - study of scriptures & self, Isvara Parindhana - surrender of self to God), Asana, Pranayama and Pratyahara (Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi). 
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

Dharana is concentration - pointed focus on something. Maintaining that concentration will lead to Dhyana. "When the object of contemplation shines forth without the intervention of one's own consciousness, dhyana flows into samadhi. When a musician loses himself and is completely engrossed in his music, or an inventor makes his discoveries when devoid of ego, or a painter transcends himself with colour, shade and brush; they glimpse samadhi. Similarly it is with the yogi: when his object of contemplation becomes himself, devoid of himself, he experiences samadhi." The difference is that the artist or musician reaches this state by effort and cannot sustain it; whereas the yogi, remaining devoid of ego, experiences it as natural, continuous and effortless. Consequently, it is difficult for an artist to infuse his vision of the sublime, which is associated with the performance and realization of a particular art form into his ordinary daily existence. For the yogi, however, whose 'art' is formless and whose goal has no physical expression like a painting, a book or a symphony, the fragrance of samadhi penetrates every aspect of his normal behaviour, activities and state of being.  Uninterrupted flow of attention dissolves the split between the object seen and the seer who sees it. Consciousness appears to have ceased, and to have reached a state of silence. It is devoid of 'I', and merges into the core of the being in a profound state of serenity. In samadhi, awareness of place vanishes and one ceases to experience space and time. When one contemplates a diamond, he at first sees with great clarity the gem itself. Gradually one becomes aware of the light glowing from its centre. As awareness of the light glows, awareness of the stone as an object diminishes. Then there is only brightness, no source, no object. When the light is everywhere that is samadhi.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}


### The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering
- Author: **Frederick P. Brooks Jr.**
- GoodReads: [The Mythical Man Month Essays on Software Engineering](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13629.The_Mythical_Man_Month)

This is considered as one of the classics of  Software Engineering. These are my take away from this book - 

* It is usually advertised that few programmers in a garage have developed a program which surpasses the best effort of large teams of a company - Do not believe that. There is a large difference between program and product/application/system. It takes a lot of effort to move the program to a product/system/application.  
* What is it that makes a person to create programs - sheer joy of creating things, sheer joy of making things that is useful to others, joy of developing or imagining the complex systems and make it work - like solving a puzzle, joy of  learning as every time its a new thing we learn as tasks become non-repetitive. 
* When we are estimating a task, the general tendency is assuming everything is going to be well and only estimating for the coding. There are 3 parts in the creation - idea, implementation and interaction with real world. When we give estimates, we assume that our idea is perfect and implementation will be very easy. But usually idea will not be bug free and real challenges starts appearing once we start the implementation. So when estimating, think of iterations of 3 parts, i.e take into account - planning, coding and testing. More time should be devoted to planning and testing. This type of estimate should be done for each task.
* We should not equate the effort spent on a work to be equivalent of progress done in that work
* Man and Month are interchangeable  only when each task can be divided such that there is no need for communication. For most of the time as more men means tasks needs to be divided and each task may not be perfectly independent of each other. So if we estimate for a task that it takes x days for a single developer, it does not mean it is going to take x/2 days for two developers. The common mistake is adding more people to a late project to make the deadline achievable. But this is a mistake, adding more people to a late project will most probably will make it take a longer time. Adding people has two affects, new people have a learning curve and adds extra communication requirement. So immediate effect of adding more people is negative. So better to add more people in the early stage of the project. 
* When a project is not finished in time(food ordered in hotel), there are 3 possible things - 1. Give it as it is, that is it will be missing some features (half baked food) 2. Wait till the product finishes (wait for the full completion of the food) 3. Add more people to make it finish within the time line (increase the burner to cook it fast). The general tendency is to go with 3rd option which will always result in burned up product (burned up in one side and half baked in another side so totally a disaster). So best option is always 2nd option - wait till it finishes i.e extend the deadline. Next best is always for the releasing with limited features. 
* Until estimating is on a sounder basis, software managers should defend their estimates that their hunches are better than wish derived estimates. 
* Always have smaller teams. In the team for a product, there should be a single main developer who will be responsible for the design. This developer should be responsible for settling any queries related to design or architecture of the team. The others in the team should help this designer. Similarly the main developer will take help and suggestions from his team. So always have a small and good programming team.  The architect/designer holds final decision and authority on the changes. Even during the meetings that chain should be well established to make the meeting fruitful. In the meeting everyone is allowed to discuss and propose the solutions which may be inside the boundary or outside. It is essential to encourage others to ask questions to the architect instead of assuming things. 
* If you are designing a module or product and the implementation will be done by others, then provide a possible implementation for it. Also be ready to accept the changed implementation done by the implementer as long as it sticks to the design.
* If you achieve conceptual integrity in product design then simplicity will be automatically achieved. Even though a product may be developed by multiple persons in a team,  but it should be developed such that for an external user it should be perceived as developed by a single mind. So it would be better that single person in the team should own the design of the product. One of the main ingredient of the successful product is having conceptual integrity.
* As we add more features to a single product, it will reduce the usability of the product. As a designer or product owner, we want to add more and more features to it. After some point this will result in loosing conceptual integrity of the product and will have negative effect. 
* There are six ingredients of a successful product - clear mission, enough man power, enough time, enough materials, adequate technology and clear communication. 
* The organization is there to help reduce the unnecessary communications and extra coordination which gets added as man power gets added. 
* For any team there are two aspects - technical and management.  So for each of them we need a point of contact - technical (director/architect), management (producer/ manager). Now these two roles can be done by a single person or it could be two different persons - one working under other (producer under director or director under producer). Manager's work is mainly communication outside the team where as director or architect communication is within the team. Manager is responsible for getting the resources, establishing schedule, gathering team, dividing work. The Architect/director is responsible for design of the product, coming up with the sub designs, clearing the technical challenges.  
* Before starting the program or product, along with the design, define the restriction under which that product needs to work. The restrictions like memory consumption limit, latency limits, CPU utilization limits, request limits.
* Forecast -> Estimate -> Price -> Forecast .This is a cycle. To generate forecast we need the postulated prices. Based on the forecast and the number of units, we derive the cost estimate. Then based on the estimate we set the price. 
* In most of the projects, the first product that comes out is barely usable. It will have lot of bugs, memory issues, may be awkward, big or small or not covering needed requirements.  So start with a prototype. After prototype, then only go with actual delivery. Develop the product with change in mind. The product grows and change is constant. 
* The reluctance to document a design is not merely for laziness or time pressure but also due to not wanting to commit to a design.  Any architect or designer should be ready to expose whole of the design, ready to defend everything he writes and expose himself to criticism. Organization should help architect to achieve it and also make sure that architect is not threatened to take the responsibility. 
* Each person in team should be given the job which will broaden them. 
* In an organization or team, managers and technical people should be interchangeable as their talent allow. Sociological barriers for bringing this into effect are - 1. Managers often think of senior people as too valuable to use for actual programming. 2. Management jobs carry higher prestige. To tackle this maintain dual ladder of advancement - Managerial Ladder (Senior Software Development Engineer -> Manager -> Senior Manager -> Vice President) , Technical Ladder (Senior Software Development Engineer -> Principal Engineer -> Senior Principal Engineer -> Director) . Corresponding Levels should have same base pay example - Manager and Principal Engineer should have same base pay salary  and other org support. A reassignment from the technical ladder to corresponding level on managerial ladder should never be accompanied by a raise as it is a reassignment and not a promotion.  Managers need to be sent to technical refresher courses, and technical people to management training. Project objectives, progress, technical problems and management problems must be shared with the whole body of senior people. Whenever talents permit, senior people must be kept technically and emotionally ready to manage groups or to delight in building programs with their own hands.  
* Total cost of maintaining a delivered product is nearly 40% of the production cost. Most of the maintenance will be related to fixing design bugs. Usually as we go about fixing the bugs and releasing new versions, the total incoming bugs reduces and after certain point this incoming bug rate will again start increasing due to some reasons like - 
	- users have learnt the product fully and are utilizing it completely and hence new bugs are found, 
	- design has reached its limits, so fixes are introducing newer bugs. 
* Test driven development is needed to build the product which does what is intended to to do.
* When one hears of disastrous schedule slippage in a project, he imagines that a series of major calamities must have befallen it. Usually the disaster is due to termites, not tornadoes.  The day by day slippage is harder to recognize, harder to prevent, harder to make up. Each one of the team would have postponed their activity by a half-day or a day but overall project would have slipped one day at a time. 
* We need to have a schedule for a project. The schedule should be divided into milestones. Milestones must be concrete, specific, measurable events defined with knife edge sharpness. Rarely will a man lie about milestone progress, if the milestone is so sharp that he can't deceive himself. If the milestone is fuzzy than boss will understand different report from that which the man gives. No one enjoys bearing bad news either, so it gets softened without any real intent to deceive. 
* We should clearly know which other modules are dependent on our module. So when we have a day slip in our module, that is going to have snow ball affect on modules that depend on us. 
* Every manager should get two kinds of information from direct reporters - action information and status information. Status information is just an education of what is going on and what is the current status of each items or milestones. This status information might have some red signals but manager or boss should not act on it. The first line manager or engineer who is reporting will take necessary action by himself. Only action information needs to be taken up by the Manager and act on it. We need to empower the first line managers and engineers to take ownership, own their tasks, work on issues and roadblocks but we need to have clear picture of what is going on. Only when the manager/engineer knows his boss will accept status reports without panic or preemption, he comes to give honest status. 
* The power should be delegated to individual teams. Any success or failure the team should own it. Any problems within the team needs to be settled within the team. The teams need to be empowered. The team should own the schedule of the project/product. They should have a process for this, either their own way or company followed standards. "The center gains in real authority by delegating power, and organization as a whole will be more happier and prosperous."
* On large projects manager needs to keep 2 or 3 top programmers as a technical cavalry that can gallop to the rescue whenever the battle is thickest.  
* One of the important factors that will determine a success of a team is its quality.  More than better tools it is the team dynamics that matter - how the team is looked after, feeding them and taking care of their needs. Managers work is not to make people work but rather make it possible for people to work. The top performer's workspace is more quieter, more private and better protected from interruption. So manager should target to achieve that for their teams - less interruption and quieter environment for the team.  


### The Power of Habit- Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business
- Author: **Charles Duhigg**
- GoodReads: [The Power of Habit- Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18594642-the-power-of-habit)

Habit has 3 parts - a trigger which indicates the brain to analyze the situation and switch to automatic mode, the fixed steps that will be done as part of your habit and finally some reward for the habit. The reward determines whether habit needs to be retained or not. But once the habit is ingrained, reward does not matter. So even if the final result of doing the fixed steps leads to harmful effects, still our mind will do those steps. So we can alter or stop these habits by doing small changes. By constantly observing the trigger and rewards of a habit we can take necessary steps to alter or stop these habits. To develop a habit, we need to clearly identify the trigger which will make us start the routine and define clearly what is the final reward of doing that reward. For a habit to sustain, we need a craving/desire to run this loop of habit - a cue, routine and reward. So to develop or to get out of a habit we need to understand 3 things - what is the trigger or cue, what is the reward and finally what is the desire which is driving this habit. So starting point or cue of the habit not only has to trigger the routine, it also needs to trigger the craving for the end result. Any product needs to give some form of output which will assure the consumer that it is working. Similarly any habit we develop needs to indicate that it is working or getting some reward. You cannot extinguish a bad habit, but can only change it. We can change the habit by maintaining the same cue and same reward but we need to modify the routine part of it. Belief makes a habit as a permanent behavior. A proper group will help to build the belief, as an individual he might have doubts but the good group can remove those doubts by strengthening the belief. In case of habits, there are  few key habits which on changing has a profound effect on other habits. So the key is to identify that  key habit and set it right. We should not be trying to fix each and everything  but rather identify few and fix them. In fixing or setting the keystone habits, concentrate on small wins. These small wins will influence other small changes which will lead to a trans formative changes. These small wins generally will not be linear. if step x was success, it does not mean x+1 will succeed rather some random step y will succeed due to the step x. To change a habit and sustain it, we need willpower. Will power has limits. As you spend will power on things, you will have lesser will power of doing other things or abstaining from things.  Its a muscle which has its limit. To make a will power as habit, we need to train for it - decide on the situation or behavior where you need to spend the will power and prepare yourself how you will be using the will power. If you think you are in control of the things or you are doing for a  personal reason and helping others then will power is sustained more but if you feel you are doing things because you are ordered to do it or you feel you are not in control then will power weakens. "When people are asked to do something that takes self-control, if they think they are doing it for personal reasons - if they feel like its a choice or something they enjoy because it helps someone else - its much less taxing. If they feel like they have no autonomy, if they're just following orders, their willpower muscles get tired much faster." In organization, make sure employees have decision making authority, self control or enjoying their work, this will bring in lot of energy, focus and enthusiasm to work from the employees.  Organizations are guided by the organization habits and these habits are developed based on each individual employees decision and decision making habits. "Leaders of an organization need to cultivate habits that create real and balanced peace as well as make it absolutely clear who is in charge." To make a new thing to be adopted by people, we need to make it familiar and the way to familiarize is via camouflage it as something which is already known i.e to adapt a new habit, dress it as an old habit. For any habit to stick or get adopted or change, we need to believe that we can change.  No matter how much you believe or how much we have will power, we will fall back to old habits. So we need to plan for such falls and relapses. What matters is how fast/early we identify the fall and take necessary steps to make sure those slips do not become a habit. The experimentation and failures are very important in long term habit making process. 
{: style="text-align: justify;"}


### ಚಿದಂಬರ ರಹಸ್ಯ Chidambara Rahasya
- Author: **K.P. Poornachandra Tejaswi**
- GoodReads: [ಚಿದಂಬರ ರಹಸ್ಯ Chidambara Rahasya](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13633552-chidambara-rahasya)

I really liked the approach in which the story began and how the author keeps the mystery through out the book,but sadly that mystery remains unanswered (may be thats why the title is called [Chidambara Rahasya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chidambara_Rahasiyam)). I was astounded how multiple topics are interweaved into a single story.The part where the intelligence officier is not able to proceed further and approaches his novelist friend to create a story based on the present known facts and then using this story to proceed futher in his intelligence was a unique way of approaching a problem. The book also describes very nicely how each individual sees the same incident in different views due to their pre-existing biases. Each individual tries to gain something from a given oppurtunity and uses selfish acts to achieve it. These individual selfish acts may look small when seen in the individual level or compared to other such individual acts, but these selfish acts quickly add up to a big dent to the overall health of the society. These selfish acts will make other acts  much easier because for the mind it gets more examples, thus helping to take the selfish side quicker and justify such deeds. The ending of the novel was very abrupt and leaves every reader with unanswered questions about the overall story or the meta physics/psychology.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

### Meditation & Life
- Author: **Chinmayananda Saraswati**
- GoodReads: [Meditation & Life](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/38389126-meditation-life)

The book starts with explaining the basic Hindu concepts of mind and how things affect the mind. Once all these concepts are explained, Swamiji provides certain steps to help improve the meditation. 
Our goal in life is to realize the Brahman or to become one with Brahman. If this can be vaguely translated, it is nothing but moving from human to super human condition. 
We are composed of 5 parts/layers/sheaths. 
1. Food Sheath - This constitutes our physical body. Anything we eat is getting transformed into our body.
2. Vital Air Sheath - This constitutes the air and liquid present in our body. When we inhale the air, it goes to lungs and from there it is transferred through out our body via blood.
3. Mental - This constitutes the emotions, feelings and queries which runs in our mind. 
4. Intellectual - The questions which arise in mental sheath usually gets settled or answered in the Intellectual field. All those planning, reasoning and analysis is done here. 
5. Bliss - This is the core part of our existence - Atman.

These layers are not separated physically rather it moves from rigid to subtle - Food has structure and shape, vital air has structure but takes shape of the body, mind does not even have structure - as you think it becomes where/what you want to be, Atman is Brahman which is everything and everywhere. 
Most of the people identify with body. Their thoughts and actions will be restricted to physical layer. They fail to understand we are beyond the physical layer. Few among them transcends and move to next stage that is Mental/ Emotions and Feelings stage - whose thoughts starts and ends in those emotions.  Few among them reach the intellectual level where they analyze each of these thoughts using logic and reasoning. Among them only few will reach the final Bliss stage thus becoming one with Brahman. 
What is that disturbs us or What is that got disturbed in our life? - It is Mind. 
What is the mind made of? - Thoughts
How are these thoughts getting generated? - Via experiences in this life as well as previous lives.  So experience is basic unit of life.
Any experience can be divided into 3 parts - subject (experiencer - who is experiencing it), object (experienced - experiencer is experiencing this thing) and finally relationship of subject and object. if either one is missing, we will not have the experience. Experience as such is bland, our mind paints it into pain or misery or happiness if we do not have a matured intellect. As this is already painted, this results in other thoughts or desires. Our desires leads to other desires and anxieties. What differentiates humans from animals are thoughts, so we humans should aim to control that thought production and thought flow. Meditation helps towards that goal. 
{: style="text-align: justify;"}
At the end everyone has same goal - to achieve absolute peace and joy. Perfection is when we are in that state of absolute peace , joy and it lasts forever.  The way we try to achieve this perfection is via continuous self analysis and introspection, better ourselves from moment to moment in our bodily strength, hearts, emotions and finally intellectual capacities. The way of life for doing this is spiritual life. This is the true religion as well. The blind faith is usually born out of fear and also being ignorant , where as true religion or spiritual life is via knowledge, self analysis and introspection.  Every experience is nothing but an opportunity for moving towards Brahman or it teaches the path towards perfection. There are different ways to achieve this - jnana yoga, bhakthi yoga, karma yoga and raja yoga. Our mind is ravaged by 3 types of thoughts - thoughts based on our past experiences, thoughts on future anxieties and finally thoughts on current excitements. We can change the quality of thought by following bhakthi yoga. Here quality of thought might be related to thoughts that arise due to an experience or past memory. We can reduce the quantity of thought by following Karma Yoga. With Karma Yoga we are following self less service, as it is selfless we are cutting off the desire and hence no future thoughts from it.  Then with Gyana Yoga, we can direct the thoughts towards the right direction.  Usually gyana is another type of addiction which once we start we cannot stop it until we reach the ultimate knowledge which is self. As we are constantly trying to gain further gyana, we are always directed towards that. 
A practice towards a goal which is done regularly and sincerely forms the Saadhana and the self effort towards that Saadhana forms the Purushartha. Saadhana should be arranged intelligently such that, you get small rewards on the way which should keep us on track.  Everyone and everything is Brahman, that means everyone of our actions is continuously forming the Brahman. Our present is formed by our past Purusharthas. This  purusharthas may be of this life or past lives. So the future depends on the present Purusharthas. 
{: style="text-align: justify;"}
To critically examine something, we need to stand outside of it or apart of it. The moment we associate it to something, we cannot analyze it, as bias will creep in or false beauty appears to it and hide the ugly things. This bias is because we cherish the possession, we are proud of possession, it has become one with us. Detachment cannot exist when we have sense of intense ownership or possessiveness.  So divine life can be obtained when we examine ourselves - our thoughts, mind, reasoning. This can only be possible when we come out of our attachment of our body, our thought, our intellect - "I" ness. Then only detachment is possible which helps to self analyze and introspect ourselves without any bias. As this detachment with our own thoughts is very difficult, our ego, possessiveness of our thoughts will hide all the mistakes or makes the mistake appear very small. So same irregularities or mistakes in others, appear as grave but in our own mind harboring such thoughts either does not surface to our conscious mind or appear to be very small thoughts. 
{: style="text-align: justify;"}
If we want to be happy, just thinking to be happy will not help. We need to take necessary actions/steps to create the condition that is necessary to bring that happiness.  As the external world is nothing but a projection of our mind, all our enemies reside in our mind and that enemy is creation of mind. This thought helps to move towards the freedom by starting to neutralize the dreadful thoughts arise in our mind due to that enemy. Character of a person is made by the thoughts and thus to change or update the character we need to correct the thoughts. Books, life of great rishis, and saadhakas helps us to generate good thoughts and thus help to update the character. Reverence to anything forms when both there is a devotion & love (heart) as well as appreciation & respect (head). Usually either there will be devotion & love or there will be appreciation & respect.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}
If we just deny or restrict the desires of the mind that is suppression. Suppressing anything will have consequences - it is going to hit back.  On the other hand, we need to analyze the desire, this will reveal the underlying motives of that desire. On discovery, these desires will go away. This is sublimation which is always better than suppressing it. As we involve ourselves in the mental and intellectual fields we will inherently stop the sensual desires (or sublimation from physical body). 
{: style="text-align: justify;"}
For the meditation, Swami Chinmayananda gives following steps- 
1. In mind submit everything of yours to your Ishta Devatha.
2. Then make sure you are sitting erect spine. 
3. Next relax your muscles through out your body by keeping the erect spine.
4. Then repeat a mantra within your mind repeatedly. 
5. Finally stop the mantra repeating abruptly. This should bring a silence and also the mind would have been occupied by that mantra. Try to elongate this silence.
6. At the end try to open your eyes slowly. 

Also every day we should allocate some time, where we will just sit and replay our thoughts and try to see the links in thoughts -  which one generated which other one. Also try to find the intentions behind those thoughts.  Introspection, detection, negation and substitution - This involves meditation. we introspect the thoughts. This detects the anomalies or bad thoughts. On detection, these bad thoughts gets negated. Once negated, we replace it with good thought which forms the substitution.  
{: style="text-align: justify;"}


### ನಮ್ಮ ಊರಿನ ರಸಿಕರು Namma Oora Rasikaru
- Author: **Goruru Ramaswamy Iyengar**
- GoodReads: [ನಮ್ಮ ಊರಿನ ರಸಿಕರು Namma Oora Rasikaru](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/7769795-namma-oorina-rasikaru)

This is definitely a very different type of book. There is no story as such but consists of many small stories about different people of a village. This gives a good overview of village life. It does touch on few of the rigid activities or customs which existed and how those customs are changed by the younger generation. This also shows the simple go free life of a villager. There are things which shows the creativeness of the villagers, age and cultural gap between the young and old respecting the traditions. Overall its a good time-pass and one time read, but a person who is from village or spent some time in village will definitely feel nostalgic about their past while reading this book.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

### NoSQL Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Emerging World of Polyglot Persistence
- Authors: **Pramod J. Sadalage, Martin Fowler**
- GoodReads: [NoSQL Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Emerging World of Polyglot Persistence](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13610343-nosql-distilled)

This book gives a birds eye view of the NoSQL. This is a good book for those who want to start using the NoSQL. 
- For the data present in an application, it can be depicted as Data Model and Storage Model. Data model is how the data is present in your application and how it interacts within your application where as storage model is about storing your data. Usually storage model does not have to do anything with your applications data model. For example, you are using SQL database to store your data. Here data is stored in the form of tables or b-tree, mainly to optimize the way it is stored and retrieved. Ideally storage model exists completely independent of data model, but in reality our data model gets adjusted based on the storage model to gain the performance in our application. For example, our data structures will be similar to storage model like tables.
- In NoSQL there are attributes that define a data as a whole, the grouping of attributes is based on the use-case. For a particular workflow, the necessary information needed is bundled together into a single object/model and this is called Aggregate Data. The same information may be duplicated in different models. There is nothing called foreign key to define the relationship between two tables rather we copy the items and put it in both the tables.
- SQL adheres to ACID property -> Atomicity - set of table operations happens as a single operation, Consistency - any operations result is visible as same to every one, Isolation - one transaction currently working will not be affected by another incoming transaction, Durability - No data loss i.e every transaction is committed. NoSQL does not have the concept of transactions, so inherently they will not support ACID. But they do have some degree of ACID. If you are trying to update a single model or aggregate data, NoSQL will do that in atomic operation.  But if you are trying to modify multiple models or aggregate data, then  NoSQL cannot do it atomically but rather application should take care of it.
- With Key-Value NoSQL database - it has only Key-Value and no structure. Now value can be another set of key-values or lists or data or any blob of data. It is like a python dictionary which does not have a fixed datatype for key-value. In case of say Java you would have created dictionary of String -> List<String>, now every entry added to that dictionary has a string key and a list of string. In case of NoSQL we are having a dictionary with fixed Key type  but its corresponding Value type is a generic object.  So if I want to look for some attribute in one of the Value, we can't create a query and run,  as Value1's structure is different than Value2's structure. So attribute may or may not exist in  all the Values.  The document database on the other hand puts some structure towards the data. All the document should have this structure, and thus allows us to create smart queries to obtain the data.  So Key-Value stores are very bad in case of searching. Actually we can simulate Key-value from using document based store. Similarly application can enforce some structure to the Value of Key-Value store. But even doing that from the database itself we will not get any performance benefit in searches.
- In Column-Family Store, a key is linked to set of columns. These columns are grouped into one family. So when we access the data, we are accessing the whole set of columns belonging to that family. The key can be linked to multiple column families.
- If we have lot of relationship between the data, than storing it in SQL might be easy but retrieving it is very expensive due to lot of join operation needed. Graph database will invest much of time during the insertion and helps to answer queries related to relationship faster. So if you have small data but lot of relationships within the data then Graph database is apt for it.
- In case of SQL we need to adhere to a schema. All our data model has to be related to that schema. So in future if there is any change to be done like adding new information, deleting an attribute, updating relationship, etc. will require significant effort. With the NoSQL, there is no schema, so it is very easy to update. In NoSQL, schema/model exists in application, and NoSQL is just a data storage. It almost clearly segregates data model and storage model. There is a problem here, if the data store is accessed by multiple applications, change of schema by one will affect the other application. So best practice is to keep the data store encapsulated by a web service and handled directly by a single application.
- Sharding is a way of storing different parts of the data in different node/machine. As an application, data is very huge but with sharding we are dividing it into multiple nodes. Thus each machine can serve only few customers whose data is stored in it. The important function here is how we divide the data into different nodes. We can use domain specific knowledge or general method like hashing.  With sharding we are not only reducing the  number of reads on the node but also the number of writes thus increasing the performance. But if we lose the node, we lose that chunk of data. Though we did not lose whole data but still broken data is useless. So sharding should always be used along with replication. If one node goes, we have other one to recover.
- One of the way to have replication is via Primary-Secondary (master - slave) replication. Here Primary will replicate its data to the secondary nodes. Thus we can direct all the reads to secondary. By this we are reducing the load on primary and thus helping to spend more resources on writes & replications. Now if primary dies, secondaries still can process reads. Though write will get affected until a new primary is elected or old primary comes back.
- With Primary-Secondary, primary is the bottleneck. If we lose primary, we lose the ability to write. To overcome this, we have peer-peer replication where there is no single primary node. So each node is primary for certain set of data and every node is secondary for certain set of data.
- With the replication comes the inconsistency. We got resilience or availability but we lost the consistency.
- Different types of conflict -
	- write-write conflict:  We have data d and  users x and  y both want to update d at the same time. x tries to update it as m where as y tries to update it as n. This will lead to Update inconsistencies.
	- read-write conflict: We have a data x and a related data y. So if you update x, it will have an affect on y and that also will get updated after some time. Here if m updates x, and simultaneously  n is reading the values , n reads old value of y and updated value of x. After sometime y gets updated. Here we have the read and write conflict due to delay. This will lead to read inconsistencies.
- We can solve the conflicts by using either pessimistic approach or optimistic approach
	- Pessimistic Approach: Do not allow the conflict to occur. Use locks -  any client who wants to update a data,needs to acquire the lock first. If you get the lock, you can update otherwise no. With this approach we are taking the hit on the performance. 
	- Optimistic Approach: Allow the conflict to occur but handle it.For example: conditional approach. Any update should verify if the data it wants to change is same as the data it had read earlier. If yes, then only continue wit the update operation, else fallback or fail.
- When replication is involved, we will have replication inconsistencies. The aim of the NoSQL is to reduce the inconsistency time window, thus achieving the eventual consistency.
- CAP Theorem - Consistency, Availability and partition tolerance.  For a given distributed system, we can achieve only two of them.  To get consistency or availability, we need partition tolerance. 
- To avoid write conflicts in case of replicated systems( replicated to N nodes), for any write to be declared successful that write needs to be propagated successfully  to greater than half of the replication nodes that is W > N/2. This is known as write quorum.  To get a consistent read you might need to write to all the nodes i.e W = N, but this will slow your writes. 
- Map-Reduce  is a type of calculation system. In the Map step, in each node we will collect the needed attributes from the documents in that node. Within that node it might aggregate all the data. In the reduce part, all the data from the nodes are combined together to form a single value.  
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

### Debugging - The 9 Indispensable Rules for Finding Even the Most Elusive Software and Hardware Problems
- Author: **David J. Agans**
- GoodReads: [Debugging - The 9 Indispensable Rules for Finding Even the Most Elusive Software and Hardware Problems](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3938178-debugging)
- First step of debugging is "UNDERSTAND THE SYSTEM". Understanding does not mean just knowing the different terms of systems and different components of a system, but rather knowing the working knowledge of the system. One should be able to answer the following questions - 
	- What is the work of the system? What is it supposed to to do?
	- What is the environment of the system? How does the system interact with the environment?
	- What are the different components of the system? What are the critical components?
	- What is the work of each component in the system?
	- How does each component do its work?
	- How does the system as a whole work?
	- How does one know things are working as it should be?
	- How does the external components affect the internal components? Or how does the input affect the output?
	- If component x fails, how does it affect the whole system and output?
- For "Understanding the system", one needs to do following things - 
	- read the code of the application
	- read the design documents
	- read the code reviews
	- read the manuals
	- ask questions to the person who knows about it
	- explain what has been understood
	- know the fundamentals that was used by this system.
	- Treat the system as a black-box and pull the leavers and see what happens.
- When something happens, look it up and understand why that happened. Do not guess. 
- When a failure happens, try to repeat the events to reproduce the failure. During this process, log every event or steps or any observation you are seeing. Some failures are intermittent. So some execution will not result in failure and some will. By documenting, we can compare the notes with non failure runs and the failure runs. If the logs or notes are detailed enough, we can see the in logs of the failure run that there will be some missing or extra steps or observations. This would help in further investigation.
- When we say document everything. Question is "what is everything?".  To know what is everything - we need to know the system and its environment , i.e we need to "UNDERSTAND THE SYSTEM".  To understand a software system, we need to read the code and infer the design from it. The other way is to run the system and observe, based on this run make assumptions of how system works. 
- Running the steps again and again manually will be painful, so better to automate this step. It might fail intermittently but that would save a lot of time during debugging too. 
- Sometimes the failure will not happen from the steps we followed, so we may have to change the steps. Be cautious not to change too many things. Its always better to do a single change at a time.
- Any system that is running, has two parts - system itself and the environment in which the system is running. So any mistake that led to the error/failure will have 3 possible cases - a. Something wrong in the system (Coding mistake led to an exception due to which website is not loading) b. Something wrong done by the environment (there is no internet connection so website is not loading). c. combination of both (Website was overrun by the resources due to too many connections - may be intentional/may be not).
- Any failure of a system has a reason. It may be covered in the randomness of the environment and the system but there is something which broke which resulted in that failure.
- During debugging, we need to try to find the cause (x). We know the effect (y) - failure/error (website is not loading). Based on the observation and understanding of the system, we will come up with N different causes. Then we start reasoning out why X1(it is not failed internet connection as other websites was reachable) is not the cause or why X2 (its not connection overrun as at the time it had only say 45 open requests whereas it has limit of 100) is not the cause. If some causes look plausible, we should read about it and go deep in them. We might also add more possible causes as we understand more about the system and environment.
- One cannot say "I ran the system x times and failure did not happen even once so it is fixed". This is using statistics as a reason for the fix. Always remember "if one does not know what is x and y in the relation x(cause) led to y (failure)", the system is not fixed yet.
- This is an interesting problem - "A family complained their car fails to start based on the flavor of ice-cream they bought from the store". The first thought that comes to our mind is - this is ridiculous -  there is no relation between flavor of ice cream and working of a car.  Now lets hear the problem in more detail -  "On some evenings, family in their car - a model x, go to a near by local ice cream shop. The shop has Vanilla, Chocolate and Meeta Paan flavors.  Car does not give any problem on the days family choose Vanilla or Chocolate, but on the days they picked Meeta Paan flavor, car won't start. It needs lot of trials before it finally starts and even after starting it does make a noise while driving". Now immediately, our thought is what is the relation between Vanilla, Chocolate , Meeta paan with Car starting? Is the meeta paan too cold, which is making the car temperature too less due to which AC is consumed more and that is affecting the engine? Is the smell of the meeta paan doing something with the car engine? Or are they taking different route when they go for picking the meeta pan, or is the day they picked meeta pan is different from the day they picked other flavors?  If you observe, our attention is fixed to finding the cause in Ice cream flavors. So we are trying hard to find the relation between ice cream flavor and the car engine where the failure happened.  Rather one should go in reverse direction - Why the car needed so many tries to start? Why was their noise when driving it? What all the possible ways that can cause it - example petrol is low or it is cold or car engine is heated up.  Now try to connect these with the ice cream flavors. On the day they pick meeta paan, is the petrol low - do they go a different route, do they have some other work added due to which they have to take a different route; Or is it cold  - do they pick meeta paan on the cold days?; Or is it hot - do the day is is hot on the days they pick meeta paan.  So the questioning should start from the failure and the system that failed not the environment.  The real reason was - "They go to icecream store on the days it is warmer. Both vanilla and chocolate are prepacked in the shop so it is quick, where as meeta paan had to be packaged after order is given. That usually takes some time. As it is a warm day, during the wait time of packaging, coolant gets evaporated in the engine. So when they finally try to start the car it wont." So moral is - "Start from the failure and the system (car), environment is just aiding the system for failure. So find why the system as such failed then find the relation between environment and the failed use case." 
- One of the best way to learn about a failure is by looking at how it failed. Sometimes it is too costly to repeat the failure.In such cases Logs and Metrics will help you understand how was the system during the event. So first thing after the event is to collect the logs and metrics.
- Use divide and conquer approach.  In the system, identify a range where the bug might be. The point where it crashed is the starting point, from there till the beginning of the system is the end point of investigation.  Choose a half way and see if things look good. If things look good go towards crash. If things look bad go further away, that is next half. Do this until you find the exact issue point. Also during this search, we might find some small bugs. Fix them and restart the search, but do not get carried away and start fixing design and best practice issues.
- During debugging, we are in the race to find the bug. So during that time, we either try to fail the system from good state to reproduce the issue or correct the system from failed state to find a fix. To do that, we modify the system by overwriting the variables, adding extra logic, updating inputs, etc. All these things should be done in isolation and tested to see its affect. If the change is not giving any result, then it needs to be reverted back. So do single change at a time and revert it if it is having no affect.
- Keep an audit trail detailing everything - time of events, steps of the event, components in the event, how each of the components interact, what was changed and what was observed. This would help in reproducing the error, analyze the failure and find the solutions for it.
- During debugging, we make lot of assumptions. These assumptions should be documented. Always keep in mind, from time to time, these assumptions should be questioned - do they still hold. Otherwise there is a chance that it might lead to wrong results/conclusions. 
- Apart from assumptions, there are basic fundamentals which we usually assume to be true. Again verify those basic fundamentals.
- It is never fixed until you know the root cause and prove it by removing the fix to reproduce it.
- When we get stuck, not knowing what is going on, it is important to get a fresh view. We can choose one of these or a combination of them - 1. Talk to Krishna about my thoughts on the issue (Rubber Duck) 2. Talk to experienced person who knows about the environment or used the product a lot. 3. Talk to an expert who knows about the subject.

### The Courage to Be Disliked: How to Free Yourself, Change your Life and Achieve Real Happiness
- Author: **Ichiro Kishimi, Fumitake Koga**
- GoodReads: [The Courage to Be Disliked - How to Free Yourself, Change your Life and Achieve Real Happiness](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/43306206-the-courage-to-be-disliked)
- Author believes that a person can change at anytime and it is easy to change as well. A person is not changing because he/she internally does not want to change or they lack the courage to face the events which will occur due to the change. They might be afraid of the unknowns - so they are lacking the courage. 
- The past events/experiences does not have any impact on the  current state of a person. Its we who give certain connotation or emotion to an experience. As experience itself does not have any meaning or character to it, like there is no good experience or bad experience, later based on our wishes (or goals) that experience will be turned to good or bad to achieve our goal. 
- Society always wants to determine the cause of an effect. If I know the cause, at least we will not repeat the same thing in the future or we take a counter measure which might help in nullify the effect.  Rather author prescribes to look for the purpose.  There are several reasons for it. "Cause" has happened in the past, so we cannot modify it. Most of the time we just find the cause and blame it on the past/cause and we are more than happy to drop that there only as we found a way to blame on something (easy escape). We justify for not taking any action saying "this has happened to me in the past so I cannot go and undo it, so I cannot change it".  Also what looks like a cause now  is actually part of a short term goal in the past. The effect is not something that is happening involuntarily due to past events rather effect was a goal and we are driving towards it. To achieve that short term goal, we are doing a task in a certain way which will lead to that goal.  
- The first step in finding the courage for the change is accepting yourself - what we are now as it is. We should accept our short comings, our lacking in things, its okay to miss something, nobody is perfect.
- In any interpersonal relationship, both parties will get hurt, I will be hurting others and other person will be hurting me at one point or another. There is no escaping from it.
- So all problems which comes from the interpersonal relationship can be avoided if we live alone - there is no comparison. Imagine that you are all alone in this universe, then there is no comparison or insecurities, probably you are content with what you are or there might be desire to do something all for yourself. You do not want to show off to others, rather something you liked, so you will do it and you will be happy that you are able to do it. Just because you are alone does not mean there will not be any desire, there will be desire for personal improvements. So the argument that without comparison you will not improve is wrong.   Now the other argument is,  would not we feel lonely? Actually no, loneliness comes when you know there are people somewhere and you are not part of that group.
- When we value one of our attribute and judge that it is of not much value or has less value, it is called the "feeling of inferiority". Example height - I might be short when compared to average height of  people. Now the height measurement or attribute itself is a fact but providing the value to that is very subjective. Example in a social status generally people of height is associated with power or strength, so people having average or above height are preferred in the social circles or relationships. So anyone with smaller height will feel inferior about their height due to being left out. Now this is subjective because if you see in another way having smaller height is an advantage in the social circle - other people will be more relaxed when interacting with shorter people when compared with other people who are treated as threat.  So "feeling of inferior" is very subjective and is based on the social group we are in and comparing among the group members.
- If we get the feeling of inferior as part of improving ourselves, that is, you are in the pursuit of trying to be superior of yourself that is a natural desire. But if we are trying to be superior when compared to others, than it is wrong.  If we use the feeling of inferior as a reason to not improve yourself then that is bad or that is called inferiority complex , for example - I cannot do it because I am bad at this; I can never be able to achieve that because I am not good in ,so and so.
- You will have feeling of inferior, and to overcome that, you will strive to grow. That is the natural way of growth. But some do not do this, rather they cannot tolerate their feeling of inferior, so they try to mask this inferiority by using easy escape route - by acting that they are already superior or they act as if they have overcome their inferiority. This is called superiority complex.  Example - One lets other know that he knows a bigger personality or in good terms with a powerful personality so that others provide the same status to them as provided to powerful personality.  Even people who keep on repeating their past successes are also exhibiting superiority complex, they are expecting people to give special status because they did something great in past. There is another version were they gloat their misfortune and try to gain special status based on their misfortune - "You do not understand how I feel". 
- Competition is bad. It makes everything to be looked in terms of binaries - win or loose, success or failure. Person involved are ranked as winner or looser, colleagues who are working with you are friends and who are not working with you are enemies. At the end everyone around is enemy. So basically everyone who are working to get success in the eyes of society will all turn up into lot less happier. As they are surrounded with enemies and will end up with lot of interpersonal relationship issues. Once you remove this competition mindset, you will see all the people surrounding you are friends and you will be able to truly enjoy their success.
- Anger is just a tool to make other person to submit to your view. This is not at all a good tool. It might appear to be very effective in short term but it has negative effects  in long term. Always talk, explain things and do not submit to anger.
- Do not get into power struggle. Example two peoples discussion over politics turns into a heated discussion. Now one of the person will start leveling personal charges on the other person. Basically person is challenging the other person for a power struggle and believes that he/she can overcome the other person by making other person dishonorable or ashamed. Now if second person retaliates with more personal charges, the person started might either back out or move to more harder charges. Even if they back out, it is for temporary and will plan for the revenge to get back. Most of the time, power struggle happens when the feeling of "I am right" appears.  
- There are 2 objectives which need to guide our behavior - "To be Self Reliant" and "To live in Harmony with the Society". To achieve these objectives, we need to have following view - "I have the ability" and "People are my friends". These will help in achieving life tasks - "tasks of work", "tasks of love" and "tasks of friendship". So any task of interpersonal relationship can be divided among these three life tasks.
- Tasks Of Work - Here we develop relationship with others for the sake of work, that is to complete a common objective/goal. 
- Tasks of Friends - Here we develop relationship outside of workplace and this relationship should be deep. So usually it is difficult to initiate. There is no value in having large number of friends and acquaintances because the relationship is not deep. Can you say for instance you loose touch of your friend for years together and one day you meet and you can start conversation as if you had a talk with them just yesterday? That requires a deep friendship.
- Tasks of Love - Relationship of Parent - Child, Spouses, lovers. This is the most difficult among the 3 tasks. This relationship survives if either of them feel free when with the other. If either of the one tries to control or restrict, this will fall apart. It is not about how passionate the love is rather how much freedom you enjoy with your loved one matters. I guess freedom only comes when we accept each other as is and treat each one of us as equal.
- We need to face all these tasks, no matter how difficult the interpersonal relationship in each of them might be, otherwise we will be failing our objectives of "self reliance" and "to live in harmony with the society". Escaping any one of them will lead to more issues.
- Any reason we come up in order to avoid these life tasks are life lies. Example Person A and person B are married, and they are living together for some time. All of a sudden after some time Person A starts to feel repulsed from person B. Every action or activity of person B feels irritated to person A. Here at some time after the relationship started, person B put a goal to stop the relationship with person A. So person B is now finding all the reasons to end this relationship. So person B is running away from life task but blaming it on person A  which is a life lie. Here its not that person B suddenly turned evil or lost morality rather person B just stopped having courage to continue the relationship.
- We always want to be recognized by the people we love, people we care, people whom we respect. This is the desire for recognition. But we need to understand, we should not have this desire for recognition. This is a dangerous thing. It boils down to "I will only do this work because they will recognize me otherwise I will not do this work" -> Work for the work sake not being done here.
- The reason people develop "desire for recognition" is because of the "reward and punishment" education system. If you do this work, we will reward you or else we will punish you. This is taught to the child from young age and later on child develops the desire for  recognition. So when you are only working for recognition, you are basically leaving others liking or trying to live other peoples life.
- Most of the interpersonal relationship problem happens because someone intruded into others task.  Each task is the responsibility of one person. How can we determine who owns the task - "Who will bear the end result of this task?" That person will be the owner of the task. Example scenario. A child is not studying, here studying in class is the task and it is owned by child and not by the parent. If child does not study, it is going to lag in the class tests and other activities. So end result is affecting child and hence child is the owner. Now parent can hard down on the child to make it study, but this is intruding into the task of child. Generally child might study now but it will not be liking the study and it is going to hate the study part as it grows and also might hate the parent.  Here it does not mean parent will not care about the child's studies, rather parents will not interfere in child's studies.  Parent is responsible of the child, so they will check on whats happening with the child, or how they are spending time, they need to know the problems faced by the child. Only thing a parent can do after knowing is to offer assistance and suggestions. It is up to the child to take that assistance and suggestions. Here important is child should be able to build up enough trust with parent to ask for suggestions, also parent himself is not doing things for child, rather both know each others responsibilities - then they both are doing the separation of tasks.
- The thought that "My child is my life" make a parent to intrude into child's life and tasks, because of this parent gets the false notion of "I am only doing for the good of my child" . This is the seed of the inter personal relationship problems with the child and parent. Child is an independent individual.
- It is not your task to make others believe you or make others recognize you or make others like you.  Example Parents say they do not approve of  your choice, it is their task to judge but it should not have any affect on you as its not your task. What others think is something you do not have control over and its not your task. "Do your Dharma"
- Any decision you make and act on it, the whole responsibility of that decision is on you. So you will not take any decision just because some one appealed to you or some reward is tied to the request or emotion is tied to the request, you make a decision based on your understanding and not for the sake of others. We are tuned to rewards and short term gains, if I do this I will be rewarded by this in x period. Reward may be appreciation from the boss, appreciation of parents, appreciation of wife/husband, patching of things temporarily so peace of mind temporarily, I will get rid of that guilt, I have payed back the previous help from that person and so on.
- It is a natural feeling that "I need to be liked by all or no one should dislike me" but we should accept that it is also natural that "someone will dislike me or not everyone will be pleased by my action", as everyone is different. If some are disliked by you, it is a sign that you are trying to be free. Also it is not your task to make other people dislike you to have the feeling of freedom, rather you do your task, based on that task if some get disliked its their task not your problem.
- Do not aim to change others. Rather change your thinking and your work. Example father and son are not in good terms. Basically father is moody and not that communicative. Son will avoid talking to him with giving reason "He is always moody , so I cannot talk to him. If he was not moody, then I would have better communication with him". This is a life lie. The son needs to put effort to improve the communication with father irrespective of how father will respond, because its his duty. Now son should not change his behavior just to change the way father is, rather son will try his best to improve the communication independently. Whether father also changes based on the change in son is up to the father and should not affect son.
- To maintain a good interpersonal relationship, we need to maintain a certain degree of distance.
- A person who has the desire for recognition is also an egoist or self centered person. If you are only thinking that I need to be thought well by others, or I should look good in front of others or every one should like me, is all about "I".  Remember you are the main person in your life but you are not the center of the whole world so others will not be living their life as per your expectations.  So we should always think that we are just the part of the community or the world but not the center of the world. This will keep our ego in check.
- We can get a sense of belonging to a community only when we give something to the community. It is not enough to be just present in the community rather our thought should change from "What I can get something from this person/community?" to "what I can give to this person/community?"
- We are always part of a bigger community when compared to smaller community we are actively working on. I may be part of the office community but I am also part of the country, world and universe community. This part of belonging to larger community helps us to avoid the trap of escapism and shutting ourselves off in case things are not going smoothly in the smaller community.
- When we use rebuke or praise for the others during the training , it is basically we are trying to manipulate others or passing on a judgement based on our thinking. Example of training here includes even parent-child relationship.Remember we are all equal but not the same. So there should not be any reward-punishment method to manipulate others. We should follow the encouragement approach. Understand what is the current condition of the person and make sure you let them know what are the assistance you can provide to help them in the situation, rather than you command them or tell them how they should do it. We act in such a way that, it builds confidence in them. Remember just by praising the other person we are not building that confidence. We help them to get that courage to face their task. Rather praise use gratitude for being there or helping out or doing that work.
- When a person feels that he is worth, then only he gets the courage or when he realizes he has the ability, he gets the courage. The way to get that feeling of worth is by realizing that he is beneficial to the community. This can only happen when we accept us as it is. 
- 3 important steps in evolving - 
	- self acceptance - You accept what you are born with and  understand that it cannot be changed. You are okay with that. This helps in gaining self reliance as well as gaining the ability to change. You can clearly do separation of tasks of what can be changed and what cannot be changed. Invest in improving those abilities that can be improved. By understanding what we are, we can clearly eliminate those that cannot be done or not suitable for us. We can avoid false affirmation. Example when I get less marks in exam, false affirmation says it was purely luck due to which I got less, but self acceptance would accept that I got this marks because I only studied less, but I need to spend more time to improve on it. Confidence in others is not same as trusting in others. Trust is based on a security, example Bank trusts you with a loan money based on a security you provide, but confidence is unconditional.  
	- Confidence in others -  We provide unconditional support to others believing that others will not take advantages. Whether other person takes advantage or not, its other persons task, so do not worry about that aspect.
	- Contribution to others - Example one works in an organization not just for earning money but for committing to society or that organization is contributing to that community via your work. If you are happily doing the work with the belief that this work is for others, then you set an environments where others can come and help you to further the work. But if you keep thinking or mumbling your dissatisfaction or just complaining then nobody would like to come and help. This change only happens when  we think others as our friends rather than as enemies.
- Because I can accept myself (self- acceptance) as is, I will be able to put confidence in others. Because of this confidence in others, I will be able to contribute to others. Because of this community help, I feel worth of myself and thus helping the self acceptance part.
- A person who is not in harmony with the life, usually finds the one thing wrong and assumes that everything else is wrong, example, finds one person dislikes him and thinks everyone dislikes him. Always given a 10 person whom you had contact, one person strongly dislikes, 2 person strongly likes and the rest 7 do not care. Usually we only think of that one person who dislikes us. 
- Harmony in life is achieved if we do our duty. Here duty is not just one aspect of say going to work in a company it can be duty of being a son to parents, duty of being a husband/wife, duty of being parent, duty of engineer, duty of being member of a community, duty of being a citizen of country and so on.


### ಕಶೀರ Kasheera
- Author: **Sahana Vijayakumar**
- GoodReads: [ಕಶೀರ Kasheera](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/40958325)

Kasheera is a novel and yet explains about various historical facts relating to Kashmir. One sentence that comes to my mind reading this novel is "Those who don't know history are destined to repeat it.". After reading the book realized how much important it is to know about our history, our religion and our culture. This is not necessary to spread the word but to survive. There is so much misinformation being spread via media, internet, schools. Opinions are published as facts, propaganda are put out as news. We are made to feel sorry/ashamed/guilty about a concocted history. To understand what is truth and to maintain our own self confidence, we need to read about our history, our religion and our culture. Do not let others preach about our identity, our culture, our religion and our history. Read, discuss with those who know and come to your own conclusions. Read other religions texts as well to understand how different each religion's perspective is.
The discussion between Narendra, Hrudhayanath Pandith, Sanjeev, TV discussions and articles written by Narendra reveal so much about the Kashmir, article 370, how Kashmir became part of India, how Nehru blundered on his tasks, Islam and its origins, how its initial days philosophy is carried over, how Kashmiri Pandiths exodus has happened multiple times.  The story of Kailash Pandith is really very disturbing and Narendra's visit to abandoned Kashmir Pandit houses makes us so ashamed of ourselves to let this happen and not knowing anything about such incidents. The story of Basheer talks about the responsibility of each person to understand the religion by their own experience rather than dictated by selected few. In all this, Saleem gives so much hope and makes it a point to not paint everyone in a single brush.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

### Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us
- Author: **Daniel H. Pink**
- GoodReads: [Drive](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6452796-drive)

Drive book is trying to answer the question - "What motivates a person to do tasks especially in a company/office?". It also explores - "Is money the prime motivator?". Many a times we feel, for things to get done from others, let us pay more to make them do it. Based on the book, this works to only certain extent and only to certain kind of jobs. This also brings in side effects. If people think, I am doing this job for the pay only, then everytime they do a work and get paid, they will not be interested to do the same work for the same pay as they have already enjoyed/achieved it. So next time, we need to pay more, then only it will motivate them to take up that work. If the money is constant and work is equated to money then people will get fixated with the money. They will slack on the actual work or try to game the system to earn more money that is in other ways they will try to work less hours so that they get same amount of money (optimization in a bad way). Money is needed for covering the basic things and maintain the standard of living, but once that is achieved, money actually hinders the work. There is the creativity factor which gets hindered due to constrained environment. Suppose there is a problem, that needs to be solved, and x people are asked to work on it. If the condition is to give them prize money to whoever solves them first or within a fixed time, this may not result in good solutions as people are fixated on time constraint or whoever is first constraint. People will be motivated by money when the work itself is more of mechanical work which does not involve much thinking/creative work or which has a defined set of steps to complete.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

For the work that involves some thinking/creative activities, then it requires following three attributes to make it more interesting - 
- There should be autonomy in the work they do
- This should be challenging or involves some form of mastery
- The work should have a purpose to which people can relate to

People usually measure their work autonomy interms of following four aspects - 
- Do they have freedom to choose what tasks to work on?
- Do they have freedom to choose at what time they can work on task?
- Do they have freedom to choose how they want to work on the task?
- Do they have freedom to choose with whom they can work with?

People want to achieve mastery and to do that, they should be aware that 
- It takes consistent effort to achieve it
- They need a goal as a perfect state to which we constantly try to achieve and never reach but its okay.

The Purpose can be effective if there is a defined goal and how best that is expressed in the working. It also requires policies which can realize those goals.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

### The Educational Heritage of Ancient India - How an ecosystem of learning was laid to waste
- Author: **Sahana Singh**
- GoodReads: [The Educational Heritage of Ancient India](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/36027562-the-educational-heritage-of-ancient-india)

The book gives a bird eye view of how education was provided in India over different century. This is a short book. The author has come up with a next version of the book which goes in depth regarding this topic. This is definitely worth a gift to children and teens. Seeing our current education system, I often wondered how it was in the ancient times. I had heard the name of Nalanda and Takshashila universities but wondered how the education and knowledge was imparted. Till now, it felt that scientific rigour was developed by the western civilization. We had scientific discoveries and scientific theories developed but because of the way it was presented in our text books, it felt like those are by chance inventions. This book completely removes such notions. We, Indians had eloborate network of institutions as well as a very structured way of imparting knowledge to the students. There are so many scripts dealing with varrying disciplines. The facilities that were provided in the university was very much comparable to the current standards. At that time also, the students from around the world sought education from these universities. Also the students and teachers of these universities were sought after for the reputed positions in many kingdoms. There were other institutions which supported them like Mathas, Agraharas and Temples. This book also gives a sad picture of how this network got destroyed with the Islamic invasions and British colonization. Even the Indian government after independence fails to support and help rebuild this network.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

This Shloka from Taittriya Upanishad (Siksha Valli) gives the oath provided to a newly graduated student.
```
वेदमनूत्व्याचार्योऽन्तेवासिनमनुशास्ति 
```
After teaching vedas to their shishyas, Guru instructs
```
सत्यं वद। 
```
Always speak truth
```
घर्मं चर।
```
Always tread the path of Dharma (do your duty)
```
स्वाध्यायान्‌ मा प्रमदः।
```
Always indulge in self study and do not sit idle.
```
आचार्याय प्रियं धनमाहृत्य प्रजातन्तुं मा व्यवच्छेत्सीः । 
```
Provide the fee Guru desires
```
सत्यान्न प्रमदितव्यम् । 
```
Never stray away from truth
```
धर्मान्न प्रमदितव्यम् । 
```
Never stray away from Dharma (or your duty)
```
कुशलान्न प्रमदितव्यम् । 
```
Never overlook your own welfare and health
```
भूत्यै न प्रमदितव्यम् । 
```
Never overlook your own prosperity
```
स्वाध्यायप्रवचनाभ्यां न प्रमदितव्यम् ॥ १॥
```
Never neglect the self study and propagation of Veda (knowledge)
```
देवपितृकार्याभ्यां न प्रमदितव्यम् । 
```
Never stray away from the works of God and ancestors
```
मातृदेवो भव ।  
```
Know your mother to be like a godess
```
पितृदेवो भव । 
```
Know your mother to be like a god
```
आचार्यदेवो भव । 
```
Know your acharya(guru) to be like a god
```
अतिथिदेवो भव ।  
```
know your guest to be like a god
```
यान्यनवद्यानि कर्माणि । तानि सेवितव्यानि । नो इतराणि । 
``` 
Only do those actions which are in accordance with the shastras and society. Do not perform actions that oppose this
```
यान्यस्माकꣳसुचरितानि । तानि त्वयोपास्यानि ।नो इतराणि ॥ २॥
ये के चास्मत्व्छ्रेयांसो ब्राह्मणाः। तेषां त्वयाऽऽसनेन प्रश्वसितव्यम्‌।
```
Moreover, only adopt our good conduct, nothing else. After leaving here, if you find a teacher better than us, then respect him, pay homage to him by offering him a seat
```
एष आदेशः। एष उपदेशः। एतदनुशासनम्‌। एवमुपासितव्यम्‌।
```
This is our final command. This is the teaching. Go forth, live according to this

### ನೃಪತುಂಗ (Nrupatunga)
- Author: **Ta Ra Su**
- GoodReads: [ನೃಪತುಂಗ](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/60261913-tarasu---nrupatunga)

This is a book about [Rashtrakuta King Amoghavarsha Nrupatunga](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amoghavarsha). This is a novel based on historical facts. But author has taken his artistic freedom to change certain aspects of it. On reading the story of King Nrupatunga, I felt it is so important to have a very good teacher who imparts the right knowledge and helps in guiding the development of right attitude. Certain ideals of King are very unique with respect to India - Whether it may be respecting the public, treating people of the state as the utmost authority, subjecting family members to scrutiny as per the law of the land or if need be do not hesitate to go for a war even when you are a peace loving king. Even though it is not democracy and yet people of the kingdom is given the highest authority. I liked the conversations between King Nrupatunga, his son's Guru Gunabadra Acharya and Golayabhatta. They explain how Kings work, if done without any attachments will lead to Moksha. And yet some aspects of the novel was not good, as at one hand King needs to hold Dharma above his family and people but still ends up giving pardon to his son.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}