---
category: Year-Review
date: 2025-03-20
layout: post
title: Year-Review - 2024
updated: 2025-03-28
---

Since 2022, I am doing some kind of end of the year review. The process has evolved each year. At the beginning of the year, I keep some goals or wishes that I want to accomplish in the new year. The year end review is about understanding how did it go and what can I learn from the previous year. Format of this review is changing every year. For this year, I have borrowed from the blog post - [Annual self-evaluation time, woo-hoo!](https://blog.plover.com/misc/evaluation.html) . 

So, lets start with good things first -
## Accomplishments/Celebrations
- Its been a year, since Akshara (ಅಕ್ಷರ) is part of our family. Experiencing the parent hood, celebrating milestones with daughter & wife is great. It does take a lot of time and effort - no doubt. Parenthood pushes you to  be more optimized. Spending time and playing with your daughter is the single best way to recharge yourself. I am still learning about parent hood. But, Anu (ಅನು) makes all this happen with ease for me.
	- We had ಅಕ್ಷರ's naamakarana (ನಾಮಕರಣ/naming ceremony). I created the digital invitation card for namakarana from scratch using Obsidian Excalidraw plug-in
	- We had ಅಕ್ಷರ's ear pierced. 
	- We celebrated her first birthday. Three of us spent the whole day together.
	- We celebrated festivals. Before Akshara was born, we used to celebrate festivals, but this time we are more involved as we feel it is passing down the culture. Celebrated these festivals -  ದೀಪಾವಳಿ - ನರಕ ಛತು೯ದಶಿ, ಗಣೇಶ ಛತು೯ತಿ, ಕೃ಼ಷ್ಣ ಜನಮಾಷ್ಠಮಿ, ದಸರ
- Improved my personal blog
	- I moved my blog's content to my personal Obsidian vault.
		- Developed a simple tool/script to do the conversion from Obsidian vault folder to Github Pages - [ObsidianToGithubPages](https://github.com/harsha-kadekar/ObsidianToGithubPages) 
		- I also wrote a blog post on how to use that tool - [[Blog/posts/ObsidianToGithubPages]]
	- I changed the theme of the blog to no-style-please
		- During this overhaul, encountered issues with jekyll and ruby. Fixed the issue and also wrote a blog post on it - [Fix_Local_jekyll_build_after_ruby_update_from_2_7_to_3_0]({% post_url 2024-03-23-fix-local-jekyll-build-after-ruby-update-from-2-7-to-3-0 %})
	- Updated the [about](https://www.harsha-kadekar.blog/about) section to add more details about me. I also added a [now](https://www.harsha-kadekar.blog/now) page, based on [Derek Siver's now](https://sive.rs/now2) page to reflect my current priorities. 
		- Sent a mail to Derek and listed my blog in [nownownow.com](https://nownownow.com).
	- I added the ability to search the posts in the blog. I also expanded it to search based on the category as well.
	- I added a new page called [blog-summaries](https://www.harsha-kadekar.blog/blog-summaries.html) which will list all the interesting blogs & articles I read.
	- I on-boarded my blog to [goat counter](https://www.goatcounter.com) to understand the overall usage of my blog.
		- Based on the GoatCounter, total visits to my blog in the past year (from April 2024) is 353 visits. I am sure in that around 100 are my own. 
	- I bought my own domain - https://harsha-kadekar.blog and intend to shift to that domain in this year.
	- Updated my existing post related to how my development configuration is present -  [My_Development_Configuration]({% post_url 2022-05-13-my-development-configuration %})
	- Published blog post [Book-Summary_The_Willpower_Instinct]({% post_url 2023-07-30-book-summary-the-willpower-instinct %}) about the book I had read previous year.
	- I have now kept references of the common linux commands, VIM/NeoVIM shortcuts and linux terminal shortcuts I use often. This is very useful for my work. I have referenced them multiple times during my work.
		- Published post [VIM_NeoVIM_Commands_For_Reference]({% post_url 2024-04-07-vim-neovim-commands-for-reference %})
		- Published post [Linux_Commands_For_Reference]({% post_url 2024-06-14-linux-commands-for-reference %})
		- Published post [Shortcut_Keys_For_Linux_Terminal]({% post_url 2024-07-15-shortcut-keys-for-linux-terminal %})
	- Posted a blog on Advice to Freshers joining a new software development team - [Suggestions_To_College_Freshers_Joining_The_Engineering_Team]({% post_url 2024-08-23-suggestions-to-college-freshers-joining-the-engineering-team %})
- I started learning Rust Programming Language. 
- Connecting To My Roots
	- I started reading Valmiki's Ramayana in Sanskrit. I do not know Sanskrit language but still able to progress with help of online tools. 
	- Spending more time on understanding Bhagavad Geeta
	- Became regular in doing Sandhyavandhana
	- Started growing veggies - mint, coriander and garlic this year
- I have observed that I have been more organized and disciplined. I have developed daily routines and most of the time sticking to it.
	- Early to raise, reviews & plans, fasting, yoga, pranayama, dhyana.
- I completed reading 12 books this year.
	- [Book-Summary-A_Random_Walk_Down_WallStreet]({% post_url 2024-04-02-book-summary-a-random-walk-down-wallstreet %})
	- ಪದ್ಮಪಾಣಿ - Padmapani
	- [Book-Summary_Walking_the_Walk]({% post_url 2024-06-23-book-summary-walking-the-walk %})
	- [Book-Summary_Shiva_Rama_Krishna]({% post_url 2024-07-06-book-summary-shiva-rama-krishna %})
	- [Book-Summary_Crucial_Conversations]({% post_url 2024-05-05-book-summary-crucial-conversations %})
	- [Book-Summary_The_Practicing_Mind]({% post_url 2024-07-20-book-summary-the-practicing-mind %})
	-  [Book-Summary_ತಬ್ಬಲಿಯು_ನೀನಾದೆ_ಮಗನೆ]({% post_url 2024-08-14-book-summary-ತಬ್ಬಲಿಯು-ನೀನಾದೆ-ಮಗನೆ %})
	- [Book-Summary_Clean_Code]({% post_url 2024-11-08-book-summary-clean-code %})
	- [Book-Summary_Made_In_Japan]({% post_url 2025-01-10-book-summary-made-in-japan %})
	- The Complete Life of Krishna: Based on the Earliest Oral Traditions and the Sacred Scriptures
	- Let the Bud of Life Bloom: A Guide to Raising Happy and Healthy Children
	- ಛೇದ - Cheda
- On personal finance,
	- Disciplined regular investments
	- Automated tracking financial goals, 
	- Steady growth in savings, retirements and investments. 
- Thanks to Anu, visited some really nice places.
- Continued with my interest of cooking by preparing many Indian vegetarian food items.

## Needs Improvements

I am mentioning here very vague things. I have specific action items from these on my end. I will be working on them through out this year.

- Deliver Results for the planned goals/projects
	- None of the planned projects reached its logical end last year. 
	- One of the main problem is - trying to do lot of things. **Do one thing at a time!** 
	- Concentrate on very few things. **Commit Less and Deliver More**.
	- Daily do some work - even if it is for 5 minutes. **Persistence, is important**.
	- Break the deadlocks into **small actionable tasks** to keep progressing.
- Optimizing Review and Planning
	- Good thing is I am doing my reviews regularly but bad thing is it is taking a lot of time. 
	- Hence, it needs to be optimized.
- Deliberate Thinking
	- I need know myself. Think deeply on various topics - self, technical, finances, relations. Understand the why part.
	- Be curious, Be open for others views & opinions, learn always and learn from everyone.
- Health is important
	- Good food habits is a must
	- Overall body and mind caring is a must - Yoga, Pranayama, Dhyana, Walking, Exercise.
	- Early to bed and Early to rise 
- Improve people relationship
	- maintain & develop relations - family and friends
	- grow the network
- Controlled Experiments
	- This year I want to try some new things - technically as well as financially. This should help me gain new knowledge as well as raise the risk appetite. 

## Looking Forward To
- On the technical side, I would like to gain technical knowledge in following
	- Rust Programming Language
	- Design Patterns
	- Linux
	- AI
- Blog - I want to build my own website using Rust and host it in the [harsha-kadekar.blog](https://www.harsha-kadekar.blog) domain.
	- I would also like to publish 12 posts which are outside of the usual book summary posts.
- Books - I want to read 12 books.
- Personal Finance
	- Build a portfolio of dividend stocks in USA
	- Diversify more in India ETF investments
- Health
	- I want to extend fasting to 24hrs instead of 12 hours
	- I want to add simple Strength Training